Mike WBL-Field Experience overview
===

[00:00:00] Okay, so Mike, the here we're gonna talk about work-based learning today, and specifically getting to the field experience portion of it at Batavia High School. So, uh, previously at Batavia High School, we had this program called Link. It was an acronym for basically the internship. Kids would find their own placement.

And once they found their own placement, they would loosely have to do time sheets, some reflection, some, you know, a final project, but very minimal work overall. Um, it also was not, um, you know, it, who knows that they're actually going, the placement, they're going to, there's a little bit of oversight, but there's not much.

Staffing for that to actually check and, and guide them and do that. There also was the, um. Idea of the loss of equity in terms of if a kid has a really good connection in the community, they could have a good experience. If they don't have a [00:01:00] many connections or good connections, well then they might not be able to get that experience.

So some kids were lucky that their parent owned a business or their parent, um, had a friend who did something, um, where other kids don't have those same opportunities. So. State of Illinois came out recently with some new guidelines for work-based learning. Work-based learning is the whole continuum of from K through 12 of kids preparing for, uh, careers in their future career and technical education.

So they came out with new guidelines, um, some, some really good things to really. Emphasize it and show the importance of it to prepare our students for what's next, not just teach them, you know, subjects and then they're not ready for careers in the future. A big emphasis of this is on something that they call the essential employability skills.

Those are the, uh, they'll also refer to 'em as the cross sector [00:02:00] employability skills. These are the employability skills, what used to be called maybe soft skills, um, areas that go across. All careers. So those, and I'll, I'll, uh, highlight those in, in a couple minutes here. But those employability skills are for all careers.

Okay. So the, um, employability skills are, I'm gonna pull them up and read through them. Teamwork and conflict resolution. That's the first one. Communication. Second problem solving, third decision making. Fourth, critical thinking. Fifth, adaptability and flexibility is sixth initiative and self-drive is seventh.

Reliability and accountability is eighth. Cultural competence is ninth, and planning and organizing is 10th. So those are the, um, 10 cross-sector essential employability, uh, skills. Um. And [00:03:00] those are for all, all careers. Any job goes across them. All those skills are needed with within each specific career cluster.

The state identifies seven career clusters. The first career cluster is agricultural food and naturals resources. The second career cluster is arts and communication. The third is finance and business services. The fourth is health sciences and technology. The fifth is human and public services. The sixth is information technology, and the seventh is manufacturing, engineering, technology and trades.

So within those career clusters, they each have technical competencies, uh, that students, you know, must have and must work towards, you know, within those areas. Um,

for example, in manufacturing engineering, one of the important parts is equipment safety. Um, another, uh, is spatial reasoning. Um, another, another is customer focus. Another is supply [00:04:00] chain logistics. So those are just some, some examples, uh, that you'll have, uh, in finance and business. Some of them are project management.

Financial reporting principles of economics and business. So I'm not gonna read through all those, but those are, those are some of the key ideas. And, uh, just some background on the, um, employability skills and essential employability, uh, skills. And then the technical competencies or technical skills that go along with each career cluster.

Okay. So we have work-based learning. We have all these skills, um, that we want students to have, uh, once they leave high school. Um, and once they enter the workforce, some entering the workforce, some going to college to get further education to enter the workforce. So all that goes into all the exploration, all of the, um.

Planning all of the, everything that goes into thinking about [00:05:00] career, um, is part of the work-based learning continuum. It really starts from career awareness, then it goes to career exploration. Um, then it goes into things like you're doing, um, team-based challenges, which might be in a specific class where you're, um, doing a challenge that kind of ties into a career field.

Career development experience. And then there's um, youth slash pre-apprenticeship and apprenticeships, and that's more of the, uh, internship type stuff that students would be doing. So we kind of go all the way from career awareness, making kids aware of different careers, and then all the way to, Hey, I wanna do this career.

And now I'm gonna actually intern to really see what it's like on a daily basis and get a really good immersive experience within our class or within our our [00:06:00] school. We wanna create a work-based learning landing page. This landing page will be on the district website and from the landing page, our thought is there's kind of a few out branches.

And the out branches would be really what our district. What our district offers, um, as opportunities that kids, that people can have. So let me pull that up. The opportunities are one, if you're a business, you could, um. Reach out to offer job shadow opportunities. That's, um, where you give students the opportunity to observe your workplace for a day or a few hours.

The next opportunity businesses can, uh, partner with us in is guest speaking. They could come into a classroom, um, or a group of kids, uh, who are interested in their, in industry, and they could share their knowledge, career insights, professional ex, [00:07:00] their professional experience with students. The third is you could be a mentor or advisor for career classes.

So some of the career classes have, um, mentors or advisors that support them. They consult in when, you know, within, uh, a group doing in an engineering class. They might, uh, have an engineering mentor who comes in and works with them. Um, when they're working on their projects or doing team-based challenges.

So the mentor advisor support students in classes through guidance, project mentorship, and industry expertise. And then the next one is the field experience, which we are calling, which are the internships, and it's gonna be called our Field Experience Course. And this is where you actually host students and supervise hands-on placements where they gain practical experience in the workplace.

I am gonna talk a little bit more about that in detail. So field experience we talked about, it's supervised, [00:08:00] it's real tasks, it's a semester long experience with ongoing employability coaching from Batavia High School staff. So unlike the LINK program, if you're in, if you enroll in the field experience course, you will actually have at the beginning, of course, a um, bootcamp, which is about a couple weeks long.

Where we're, uh, helping students get prepared for their placement, helping them with their interview skills so they can attain a placement and, uh, coaching them so that they have the workplace readiness skills. They understand the employability skills and they understand the high expectations, um, that's required to be able to be successful in a career.

This course, um, you could do it semester one or semester two, and you'll be, uh, getting 60 hours of experience. At a minimum, most kids will get more. It could be a paid [00:09:00] experience or unpaid experience. Some ideas are that some people will just hire the student as an employee and pay them a normal hourly rate.

Other people will put more of a stipend or a, um. One time payment, um, number on it. For example, they might say for working 60 hours, we'll give you $500 for this semester. And that, that could, you could equate it to an hourly rate, but it's a chunk of money that compensates students for their time in order for businesses to be competitive and to be the ones that students want to go to, which, um, I think businesses will want.

They have to have some form of compensation, some form of incentive for students to want to pick their business over a different business. One of the focuses of this, um, in achieving businesses is we wanna talk about the benefits for the business. It's not just helping the high school kids is helping the business.

Um, they get [00:10:00] access to motivated, coachable talent. They also get to preview potential future employees. They also get fresh ideas and support on daily tasks. This also strengthens their community partnership and it also builds, I, I guess it really builds a chain of employees in a pipeline for kids in the future to possibly go work at their company, and it creates a real.

Um, connection between kids and what that company is, which is really important. The kids will help the company. They have fresh ideas. These high school kids do great things and their ideas, uh, as long as they have some structured training, they're able to go off of that and do some really great things.

So the type of student we want in this class is a responsible. High school student interested in that field. Students, uh, receive, will receive continuous coaching on professional practices so regularly throughout the semester, although they will be meeting, [00:11:00] um, at their, uh, field experience placement, they'll be going out in the community at whatever job they, um, attain.

Um, they'll also have, um, meetings every couple weeks with their field. Uh. Field experience, instructor and class to discuss, keep working on employability skills and keep furthering their, um, employability skill, um, and workplace readiness skills. So that, that's an important thing. It's an ongoing coaching for them.

Um, they'll also develop skills with, what they're gonna do is they're gonna create a schedule. Um, each week a calendar for where they're at. They're going to have an hourly time sheet for, again, where they're at each week, organize that, do a weekly reflection on the tasks that they've completed, and then this will all culminate with a capstone project, um, which basically will show what they've done.

It's gonna be focused on storytelling. [00:12:00] And it's telling the story of, look at what I've done this semester. Look at the products I've created, look at what I've attained and look at what I've learned. Uh, some of the kids are gonna say, I've learned all this about this interest industry. I love it. I wanna do this.

Other kids are gonna say, I learned this about this industry and it's made me want to go a different direction, and that's okay. So that's the capstone project that'll happen in this field experience course. Okay. Let's go back to developing the, uh, landing page for all this. So we talked before about having a work-based learning big picture landing page with four options.

The option, um. That we, all these options have opportunities for businesses. The business, once they see this landing page on the website, they click the different options. They see the, the possibilities they can, um, have to partner with the school district, Batavia school district for these options. Great.

Now [00:13:00] we're gonna have a second, um, I guess different website or landing page the second. Second landing page is for the students who are in the class. When students are enrolled in field experience, they will have the field experience landing page. What they will have on that is a calendar of all the work materials and everything going on that semester.

They'll have resources shared by the teacher, um, due dates, um, forms, all the links and everything that goes on with the semester. The other aspect about this website is they'll have a section. That says, um, the different careers where they will be able to click into the career cluster they want. And as they click into the career cluster they want, they can click one page documents of specific businesses that we have partnered with.

And this is our goal. We wanna. Create these one page documents for a lot of businesses in Batavia, um, and are in, in the [00:14:00] nearby, uh, cities so that students can see these one pagers. And if they're like, I'm interested in electric, you know, and being an electrician, maybe there's three or four one pagers.

And then what the students do is they go into those, look at those contact, there's a contact information of those businesses. They reach out and say. And they apply and, and ask to work with them, and then they do an interview and hopefully get it, get the placement for one of them. And that's our goal.

But we want a nice spot on our field experience student landing page to be able to do that. Beyond that, we have one more landing page. The one more landing page is for businesses that are in part of field experience, so businesses that. They've partnered with us. Once you partner with us, Hey, here is the information you need to know.

Here's the expectations, the policies, um, here's what we require of you. If you wanna partner [00:15:00] with us, we require this. Um. And we don't wanna make it too complicated because we want them to partner with us, but we wanna make it, um, direct and detailed enough where they know what's expected of them, and then we can offer a quality, um, consistent product across, you know, for all students with their experience.

Um, part of that is we don't want to a kid go into experience and, and not getting the, the full experience. Okay, so that's kind of the work-based learning, big picture. Um, a lot of the things that go into it again, um, we are focusing on, and I guess to tie one more things in, one more thing into that. And what we will focus on in our field experience course are three types of workplace experiences really.

The first type is internships. We've talked about that a lot. [00:16:00] That's you're going out to a business, working with a business. There also are two more types that kids can do in this field experience. Class One is a student led enterprise. This is a kid generally who has been part of the incubator. One program who has now created a business and wants to continue working on their business.

They would be in their student led enterprise. That's their own business. So that's another group of students that would be in field experience. The third group of students in field experience would be students working on a school-based enterprise. So. That could be something like a, if there was a school store or if there was a school business that was functioning, uh, to help students.

Maybe it's a school coffee shop or, um, something like that. Or one thing we have at Batavia is the Bulldog Media team. So students who are part of that are working really for the school. Um, and it's a school-based enterprise and they're working on their media. Um, [00:17:00] and all that goes into that. So the three categories are internships, school-based enterprises, and student led enterprises.

If you're in one of those and you take field experience, you're gonna get your experience and go the the direction that you should. There are a couple, um, other things like some kids go into clinicals, um, or some kids, uh, go into and the clinicals. So in the clinicals, if kids go into that, generally that's for medical, but we do a lot of the clinicals through, uh, Fox Valley.

So not really worried about that. That's more of language, um, difference of internship versus clinical. It's an experience in a workplace. So, um, the key thing is that students in our school, in the field experience course, are going to do an internship, the school-based enterprise, which right now is Bulldog Media team.

Or a student led enterprise, which is kids who've developed their own business, which are incubator students who are [00:18:00] now moving on and continuing with their business. Okay, so let's, let's go over a couple other key things about field experience. Um, the Field Experience course provides students with an authentic work-based learning opportunities aligned to their career interests and the Illinois career development and employability skill standards.

Um, there's a long, there's a big process for getting into this class. Uh, what we've been doing this year in preparation for next year is students had to enroll, then they had to fill out an application and attend a meeting. If they didn't do those two things, then they don't get into the class. Part of that is just making sure that it's the right class for them.

You know, maybe they should have taken an engineering class before they decided to go do field experience with engineering. That would make sense logically. So, although we wanna give kids experiences and give lots of kids experiences, we want them to be the right experiences and we wanna make sure we follow [00:19:00] a good process, not just throw a kid into a career.

That would be more of job shadowing for them just to see something. But when they're in an internship, we're putting them into this situation because they have an idea of, this is something I wanna pursue, um, much more than just, oh, I want to take a look at this. So taking a whole course on, again, using engineering for example.

Will, if a kid at the end of that course still wants to be an engineer, that's a good thing to do, and that also gives them some of those technical skills that will help them in the internship experience. Um, the Field Experience Program is committed to equitable access for all students, while standards for professionalism and safety must be upheld, the readiness process.

So this whole interview, um. You know, application process is designed to be growth oriented, transparent, and supportive. So the next phase, now that we have a list of students who've inter or who've applied, gone to the meeting, [00:20:00] what we've done is we've pulled their attendance, um. Tardies, discipline records, um, some of those type of things.

And then what I'm going to do, uh, is interview the students. So as a school will, will interview the students and, um, get a sense of how they meet the employability skills. And again, make sure that they're in the right spot. You know, this, this is the fit for them. They should be doing this. Um, they shouldn't be taking another class or all those type of things.

So. That's kind of the final step to making sure like we have the right kids. Once we take all that together, we'll make a final decision on the kids and narrow our class down to the, the number of students that we'll have. Um, some of those other key things we look for are, um. Uh, we talk about, uh, their academic standing attendance discipline.

Um, did they complete the application and are they committed? You know, are are they [00:21:00] able to meet the 60 hour requirements? Some kids say they are, but when we sit down and talk with them, they might not understand what that actually means, because, for example, if they wanna work for a business during their class, you know, their end of day class well.

Some of those businesses might not be open at that time, so you're gonna have to commit to maybe working at night, working on the weekends, working after school. So those are some things that the kids need to realize are possibilities depending on the business and career they choose. Um, so again, the process is students enrolled, they did the application.

We're gonna have a interview meeting. Uh, so then they have the interview meeting, and then we do a final, um, I guess pull together with all that. One other thing I missed was part of their application was they filled out a teacher reference. So they, uh, wrote down a teacher that could, uh, speak on their behalf and say that they have the skills, um, for this [00:22:00] class.

So we're also gonna reach out to those teachers, uh, for that. So then we'll give kids a um, response. They're either gonna be ready and they're in the class. They're gonna be, um. Not ready yet. They're not in the class or there's this in between, which is ready with conditions. There might be, uh, some students that we say, Hey, as long as you know you've had, you've been really bad on tardies.

Everything else looks good, but as long as this semester you're good on tardies or attendance, then you know, you could stay in the class for next year. So it'll be ready with conditions there. There could be that category that's gonna be a much smaller category, but possibility. Um. Students may also reapply for the next year, um, once they feel like they've met readiness benchmarks, if they didn't make it in the class.

Okay. So that, that's a big portion about what this [00:23:00] is all about. Um, we've gone through the employability skills, we've gone through what field experience is, so I wanna talk a little bit more about what the placement is actually going to be like. So the placement into field experience is going to be a process, and we have to, as a school district, our job is to develop partnerships with businesses.

Um, so basically reach out to businesses and say, here's something we're doing. We wanna send kids to your businesses. We wanna send them, here's the structure we need. For you to follow. So it works for us. We don't want that to be over consuming to businesses, but we also want it to be structured enough where it allows all kids that go to businesses, we know that they meet our expectations, they're developing skills, they're getting a good experience.

So we want the quality of it, um, to be salad. So with that, that is, uh, the [00:24:00] key thing. We gotta reach out to businesses, make sure they understand that, and then make sure they agree upon that. And they'll say, and they say, yes, we'd be willing to take kids. Now that doesn't mean we're gonna send them kids all the time, you know, each semester or every year even.

It's only based off student interests and we wanna have multiple options. So that's one thing too. I want to have, again, I want to have, uh, let's say there's three or four, uh. Graphics businesses that want to take a kid. Well, if two of the businesses are willing to give kids a, um, much more intense program.

And the third or, and the third one. Um, and I guess, let me rephrase that. If two of the businesses are willing to give the kids a really good experience and very detailed and pay the kid, and then the third one's like, yeah, we could give you that really good experience, but we're not gonna pay you. The kid's probably gonna go with the paid ones.

So we wanna incentivize the businesses to want to take the [00:25:00] kids as well, because the kids are gonna going to help them. The kids are gonna be able to do those projects that they never have been able to do. You know, maybe they, I've never been able to get to this. So maybe it's a, um, business, um, uh, in town and their, uh.

You know, working, um, they work events and they're like, and the business is like they do, maybe it's the, the city of Batavia. And, and they work spec, the intern specifically working with event planning logistics and maybe one of the events they never got to is something that they can really give this intern, uh, the role of leading and, and.

Planning and going through and then having this extra employee helps them do that. And especially somebody who's excited about it and wanting to do a good job and can use, uh, technology and, and all those things. So we want businesses to incentivize students to come there, and we want businesses to also be incentivized.

I [00:26:00] think the biggest incentive for businesses is they have this, they have this open pipeline to. Young, um, great potential in these high school students. I mean, it, it's kind of cool that they, they have this workforce for them that they can pull to, if they do a good job, kids are gonna wanna work for them.

So it, it would be pretty cool to be able to develop that, um, and to keep establishing their workforce for a, for a long time. So how do kids, so we reach out to businesses, develop connections. I also think a big part of developing connections is when I meet with students in their interviews, they already might have connections.

We don't wanna say, oh, you can't have connections. They, they might have great connections. We want to use those connections and tap into them. Maybe their parent works for a business, um, in town, maybe their, um. Neighbors, a realtor and said they could come work with them. Uh, we want to tap into those and then reach out to those people and make sure [00:27:00] that they're not just willing to take just their kid or this kid that they know, but they're willing to take other kids and follow our guidelines as long as they do that.

Are not so not crazy strict guidelines. Um, as long as they're willing to do that, then they're create, we're creating a partnership with them. That will be awesome. And I think that's really a way we're gonna develop a lot of great partnerships is through our kids and the connections that they already have in our community.

So this spring, uh, kids are going, we're, I'm meeting with kids and trying to figure out where should they go. Next fall is when the class starts. So during that time, and for some kids, some kids might start next, you know, spring of the next year, um, because they're taking it second semester. But if they're taking it next fall, that's when they gotta get their placement.

So right at the beginning of that bootcamp, we are boom, exploring and trying to get those placements right now. Some of the kids might, might [00:28:00] already have a lead in to their placement that we've already talked about. That's fine. Um, and that's really good. We'd want them to do that. Um, and ideally I think we'd provide them with these, um, one pagers and, you know, from the landing page of their, of the field experience class, we'd provide them with these resources.

In, uh, in late summer so they could start exploring and when they get to class, they have an idea of, these are the four businesses I wanna apply for. Maybe they've already applied. Um, getting ahead of the game I think is great and I think it helps businesses. So the student actually has to apply for those businesses and they have to get the job.

There's a chance some kids might not get jobs, we'll help them and we'll support them. We have, we wanna establish. Jobs in our school district that kids can work. Um, that also helps for kids with transportation issues. That's another, um, area where it helps the, uh, equitability of this. You know, if a kid's like, well, I wanna work marketing, but all the marketing people, [00:29:00] all the marketing people are.

Um, businesses are, you know, I have to drive to get there. Well, maybe you work for our athletic department in marketing. Maybe you work for our, um, our administration at our high school. Maybe you work for, uh, our club sponsor. You know, there's a lot of different ways we can get you a really good experience, uh, with that.

And so we're, our goal over the next few years is to develop a lot of those opportunities, um, within our school and our district. And our district is committed to that. So that's a great way to do it. So kids gotta find the job. They're ultimately responsible for it, which I think puts an important, it flips this.

Importantly, some school districts do this, and what they do is they have the student or they have the, the student goes through a program, gets recommendations, and then the school finds them a placement and the school says, Hey, we have a kid interested in being an [00:30:00] electrician. We're gonna send this kid to you while the business has to trust that the school screen, the student, and now if there's a bad experience that's really on the school for sending the business, that could really hurt partnerships for this.

Our goal is, yes, we've done a level of screening process to make sure you could be in the class, but then ultimately the kid has to get the job and the business has to accept the kid. So it's not us, um, putting our partnership with that business on the line every time. Yes, there is a level of, if they're never getting, you know, quality candidates, they're gonna wonder what's going on and why they aren't.

But, um, that's our, that's our goal with this, is we want the kids to get the job just like they would in the real world. Um, but we are there to support and give them spots and resources to do that. So a big part of our landing page would be that. Um, I think that's most of what I have to say. With all this, [00:31:00] I'm gonna go through really quick here and see if there's any other key aspects of, uh, work-based learning that I want to discuss.

Um, I guess a couple, couple other work-based learning students have to meet the guidelines with the state. Um, so that that's important. And this program's designed to meet all those guidelines. Field experience is a culminating experience for kids who are interested in a career. So if they've taken a CTE course, like maybe foods they've taken, culinary one and culinary two at the high school.

Their next step would be to take field experience and go actually work in the culinary, um, career area. Um, or for example, if they took, um, a couple business classes at the high school, their culminating experience would be to take field experience to go work that. So we want to have that opportunity [00:32:00] in our, in our district and in our school and think this is a great opportunity for kids to.

One, save money because they're gonna know what career they want before they're graduating, so they know what direction they have to go next. Not just, I'm gonna go to college because that's what I'm supposed to do, when really maybe their career doesn't require them to. Um, so we, we push them in the right direction, I think with this program.

Two, we give kids an actual quality experience, so they have experience to set them ahead. When they want to go into these fields, they know what it's like. They've already developed connections, they've already networked. They have a great experience, positive experience for them, and they're already ahead of the game.

And in a. Competitive job market, you know, and it, it depends what job market you're in. Having it. This experience and quality experience in a safe environment, like during high school is a great way to put yourself ahead. Um, [00:33:00] so field experience, we're really excited about it. We think it's gonna be an awesome program.

We're excited to develop it in the district. We wanna do a great job. Um. Starting this program this spring and you know, getting everything set so that next year it runs smoothly. Uh, kids are able to see different businesses that we've partnered with. Um, we also have, uh, some good resources for businesses to connect on.

The work-based learning landing page will have a form that we've already created that businesses can click to say where they'd like to be involved. Um. So that, that's the type of stuff we're excited to do and we're excited to, um, continue to build this and build our connection with the community and, uh, go from there.

I.

